Simple Linear Regression Diagnostics
===

GRAPH Courses Team: [00:00:00] Hello and welcome back. So far, we've introduced you to the basics of linear regression.

now we're gonna look at some of the key diagnostics behind that, linear regression model. So let's get started.



GRAPH Courses Team-1: so rather than slides, what I've created over here is a little website, a little interactive that we're gonna walk through step by step, and you can also open the website yourself and play around with some of these interactive diagrams. 

it's a fairly detailed document, so in this presentation, I will only go through a few of the main points.

Let's start by looking at this acronym here at the top. So the acronym we're gonna use to think about all the regression diagnostics is sunshine. You may have heard the other acronym commonly used, which is line LINE, but that misses a few of the key, diagnostics . And so we've tried to create this other one for you.

Sunshine. and the S stands for sample [00:01:00] size. The U stands for uncorrelated errors. N here stands for nonlinearity. Then the S stands for shape or really linearity, and then H is for homogeneity or variants, or you can call that homogeneity.

The I is for influential points. This second end is for normality of residuals and the ease for Exogen, so lots of new words may be. but hopefully by the end of this video you have some intuition for the most of them.

So let's start with S for sample size. In some sense, this is the easiest one. It's basically asking do you have enough observations for your model and what is enough observations?

There are different guidelines given from textbook to textbook, but a commonly used rule of thumb is to aim for at least 10 observations per parameter that you are estimating. 

What this means is that, with simple linear aggression, you're going to be trying to get 20 observations, at least 20 observations. 

So if you add a second predictor, let's say you wanted to predict a birth [00:02:00] weight based on the weeks of gestation and maybe the weight of the mother, now you're going to end up with three parameters. And the recommended minimum based on this rule of thumb, would be about 30 observations.

Now why does this matter? Generally speaking, when you have a small sample, you're going to have noisier estimates. So that means very wide confidence intervals, but also very importantly, you can't really check your model assumptions. So the remaining model assumptions, especially these four SHIN, are gonna be quite hard to check with few observations.

And then another important issue is that individual observations will tend to dominate. So just one unusual point can really drag the line. And like it says here with a small N, you may not notice because you can't really check these assumptions. Now let's do three quick practice questions based on that.

This question says, both panels show the same true relationship, but then a single new Red Point has been added to each. In which panel did the new point most reshape the fitted line? Pause and think.

[00:03:00] So here the answer is going to be the n equals eight panel. You can see over here. that without this red point, both of these, distributions have about the same slope. But then when you add the red points to both of them, because this one has a smaller sample size, that single point is able to be very influential and pull the entire, slope, in a completely different direction.

GRAPH Courses Team-1: So in this n equal eight panel.

As it says here, one unusual point can noticeably rotate the fitted line. So this is one of the reasons why we try to have larger sample sizes.

Here's another question. It says, the two intervals shown are centered on the same slope. Estimate which sample size produced the wider confidence interval? Pause and think. So here, of course the answer is going to be n equals 15. So n equals 15 is gonna produce a wider confidence interval

because with the smaller sample you'll have more uncertainty. 

so that's what we had to say about sample size. Let's move now to uncorrelated [00:04:00] errors. With uncorrelated errors. What we're asking is, are the residuals independent of each other? As it says here, each observations prediction error should carry no information about any other. If knowing one residual helps you guess the next, then the errors are correlated.

to understand this better. We'll look at a bunch of examples. We'll look at one type of violation where you have clustered data, and then we'll look at another type of violation where you have what we call auto correlated data or time ordered data.

First, let's look at the clustered data example. 

so here we have a scatterplot where we're trying to fit a relationship between the minutes spent with a doctor in a specific doctor's appointment and the patient satisfaction. And overall, it seems like there's a positive relationship. So the longer your appointment was, the more satisfied you are.

And it looks like we have about 25 separate dots in this, in this regression, a sample size of 25.

But if I click on this Reveal Clinic Colors button, what I'm going to see here is that there's actually about five [00:05:00] different providers, five different doctors or five different clinics, and some of them, for example, these red dots over here tend to have generally low satisfaction, and others of them, for example, these blue ones here tend to have generally high satisfaction here.

So what this means is that the residualsfor example, these blue ones will tend to be correlated with each other. They tend to be generally quite high, and the residuals for these red ones are going to be generally quite low. They're gonna be negative.

So this violates this assumption here that. Each observation's prediction error should carry no information about any other, because the residual information from this blue is somewhat related to the residual information from the other blues because they come from the same distribution, they come from the same clinic.

And as you can see, it seems the clinics are systematically different from each other.

now why is this a problem?What exactly is the problem? Well, generally speaking, your standard errors are going to tend to be too small because the model is overestimating how much independent [00:06:00] information the data contain.

So here it looks like you have 25 independent pieces of information, but maybe in reality you have something closer to five. And if your standard errors are too small, then your confidence intervals will also be too small, similar for your P values. 

Now, how can you assess for this kind of issue? You have to think about your data collection. Are the observations grouped by site, maybe by school, by hospital, by family.

And then you can compute what's called an intraclass correlation coefficient to measure how much variance is between versus within the clusters. And here we have some links as to how you can do that. Okay. In terms of how you can fix it, you can fit what's called a multi-level or mixed effects model that will account for this grouping, or you can use what's called cluster robust standard errors.

And again, we have links that show you how to do each of these things. In this video, we're just giving you the broad overview. if you want to actually implement these on your own models, you need to do a bit more work looking at some of those resources.

So that is violation type one, which is cluster data. Let's [00:07:00] look now at violation type two, which is auto correlation or time order data.

Here what's happening is that when data is collected over time, very often nearby observations will have similar residuals. Let's look at, this example.

here we're looking at the effects of pollution on visits to the doctor for asthma.

and we try to fit this line through the data, but if we click on this button reveal weekend versus weekday, what we're going to see is that there's a very specific pattern here wherein on the weekends, the weekends here are represented by these red dots. There's way more people coming into the doctor, of course, because children are off from school.

So the parents think, oh, this is a good day to go to the doctor for this issue.

And, if you take these visits and you plot them by day, you see this very clearly. There's a time trend over time every week. So, as you can imagine, this has a similar problem to what we saw in this previous case because knowing the residuals of say this point gives you information about the likely residual of the previous point.

There's a, relationship [00:08:00] between their residuals. they're not uncorrelated. Remember, the U in sunshine is for uncorrelated. 

And the problems that go wrong are similar to what we saw in the previous example. How do you assess this? You can plot the residuals in collection order like it says here, or there's a specific test called the Durbin Watson Test that you can also try.And then how do you fix it here? A few different ways to fix it.

I won't go over them for now, but you can look at them in your own time. Now let's do two practice questions on this section of uncorrelated errors.

It says You collect patient outcomes from 10 clinics and fit a single regression that ignores which clinic each patient came from. Which assumption is most directly threatened? Pause and think. So here the answer is going to be the independence of errors. 

Okay? So because the patients from the clinic share similar context that residuals may tend to look alike, and so you should consider this when you're doing your regression.

Now, here's another question. Residuals plotted in collection [00:09:00] order, move-in runs of similar values. As you can see over here, they're removing and runs of similar values. That means you have lots of positives, then a lots of negatives.

What does this suggest? Pause and think

here the answer is going to be B. Nearby rows have residuals on the same side of zero, so they're not independent. 

GRAPH Courses Team-4: Now, the N in the SUNSHINE acronym stands for no multicollinearity. However, it refers only to multiple linear regression, and we're going to keep this first part of the video specific to simple linear regression, so we'll come back to this later on

GRAPH Courses Team-1: Now before I talk about shape or linearity, which is what the S stands for, you'll notice that over here we've noted that these, five types of assumptions are checkable with this specific function in r the check model function from the performance package com,

And to show you what that is, I'm actually going to grab some code from under this, linearity section or this [00:10:00] shape section. So here we have a scatter plot where we're trying to predict a person's, vo O2 max, which is kind of their, lung fitness based on their weekly exercise hours.

And over here you can see, you can actually copy the R code that is going to plot this specific model. And then it's also going to check each of the residual assumptions or each of the model assumptions, I should say.

So I've copied that R code. Let me take that over to my R studio.

And I paste in the code here. So we're loading in the Gigi plot and performance library. Then we're creating a data frame here. Then we fit the model. So let's run all of that. And then we also plot that model. And then finally, we're using this check model function from the performance package. So let's run this.

And as you can see, the plot is a bit squeezed, but I can click here to zoom in.

and now we can see all of these diagnostic plots. The four we're going to be focusing on are this one, the Linearity Plot. The Homogeneity Plot, the Influential Observations Plot, and the Normality of Residuals [00:11:00] plot. This is the SHIN that we talked about in Shin Inside of Sunshine. We skipped this one because this one is about be statistics, which we haven't really taught you. So we'll focus on these four SHIN, and these are all going to be reproduced inside of that interactive document so we can focus on that online version.

And maybe one quick thing to mention is that this check model is a nicer version of what you can also get from Base R by just typing plot model. So if you type plot model, you also get a bunch of plots that basically mimic those four plus it'll ask you here to hit return. Let's hit return.

And you see those same four plots, or at least similar to them, but they're not as nice and they're much harder to read. So for that reason, I like this check model function from the performance package.

Okay, so I was just explaining this thing about performance check model. Now let's talk specifically about the linearity or the shape. Now this assumption is fairly intuitive. It's basically asking, is the relationship really a straight line? 

and what we have here is an example dataset that has a good fit. That [00:12:00] is, it fits this assumption. One that has a very bad fit, a clear violation of this assumption, and then a borderline one.

Let's start with the clear violation one. So here we're looking at the relationship between study hours and quiz score. On this scatterplot, on the x axis you have how long did a person study? And then on the Y axis, what they got in a quiz. And as you can see, it seems there's a very clear relationship.

Maybe it's a bit too clear. This is a simulated dataset, so it's a little bit too fake looking. But it seems that exactly based on how many hours you spend, studying, you get some specific quiz score, but it seems to max out around the top of this scale, so you don't just keep going up straight.

And that should make sense because your maximum score, of course, is gonna be a hundred percent. So you can't really go off the scale. However, even though this is clearly not a linear relationship, you can still fit a line through it. And R will just fit the line for you, even though the fit doesn't really make sense.

Now, there are two main ways you can diagnose this. The first one is just to, of course, look at your scatterplot. Sometimes it's obvious whether or not it's linear, but if [00:13:00] it's not obvious from the scatterplot, you can also look at this linearity plot here.

Which we call a residual plot or a residual versus fitted plot, and all that is you just take this line over here, or you take this plot and you kind of rotate it until this line is horizontal and that allows you to plot on the Y axis the length of each residual. So the length of this line here is represented over there.

And therefore it'll kind of exaggerate these residuals to make it very easy to see this non-linear pattern.

so here it's a bit obvious. In this case, this is not linear. Let's look at the borderline case. This one does not seem to be linear. It seems to maybe have a bit of a curve like this, but it's much easier to see that in this linearity plot where we fit the residuals. And then in addition to fitting the residuals, notice that we also have a line that kind of tracks the average of each residual, and that gives us a sense of the overall shape of the pattern.

The other thing you'll notice on this plot is that you have a confidence interval, confidence interval around this line.

and this is super helpful because this line, [00:14:00] the green line in the center is almost never going to be perfectly straight. But as long as the confidence interval tends to at least touch this dotted line in the middle, then you are probably good. so to drive home that point, let's look at the good fit. There's the good fit for linearity. Now, if we look at this residual plot, even though this green line over here is not exactly straight, you can see that over the entire section of the plot. The confidence interval is touching this center line, this center line of a residual of zero. So that's probably enough to give us confidence that what we're estimating is good to think of as a linear relationship.

so now I've talked about what it means for your, relationship to be linear or non-linear, and we've shown you how to read that plot. Let's look at the effect on your results. 

So if you fit the regression that is violating this linearity assumption, then your slope is going to be biased because a single line cannot capture a curved relationship. You need a different kind of model. And then similarly, your ses and confidence intervals are also unreliable because they're built on the wrong model.

So [00:15:00] overall, your predictions are systematically off. So what do I mean by that? Let's look at this clear violation example. Overall here, your predictions are systematically off because you're over predicting the actual, quiz score. Over here you're under predicting the actual quiz score. Over here you're again, over predicting it.

So over overall regions, there's some kind of systematic error in your prediction because this is not really a linear relationship.

And then there's a formal test you can do for this called the Ramsey Resets Test. Now, in a lot of these formal tests, especially for SHIN, that is shape Homogeneity, influential point, and normality, a lot of the formal tests can be a little bit oversensitive when you have a large sample size. 

Sometimes it really is just best to look at these, diagnostic plots. And then in terms of how to fix,

One way is you can transform the predictor by taking a log or square root. We may look at some examples of this in the workshop. And then another important way, which I'll mention is you can fit a non-linear model. so linear aggression is a strictly linear model. There's other kinds of models you can fit, and there's some links to how to do [00:16:00] those in this section.

So now let's pause and look at one practice question 

this is a residuals versus fitted plot. So this is an example of this plot. 

A stylized one. Of course. It says, what reassures you that linearity holds is it that A, the smoother over here in this green line stays close to zero or B, that the positive and negative residuals balance out, pause and think. So here, of course, the answer is going to be that the smoother stays close to zero.

Now the next model assumption we're going to look at is this H in Sunshine, which stands for homogeneity of variants. Sometimes that's called equal variance, or it's also called homo spasticity, which is a fairly. Scary term, but we're just gonna use the term homogeneity most of the time.

GRAPH Courses Team-2: And what this basically answers is what are the spread of the residuals are constant. So the model assumes generally that the spread of the residuals indeed are constant. The [00:17:00] models assume, indeed that you have homogeneity of variants, for your residuals. So let's see what exactly that means. We'll start by looking at this clear violation example.

And what we have here is we have a motto trying to predict medical spending based on household income. And what you will notice is that at low levels of household income, the medical spending is indeed low.

And then as we get to higher levels of household income, we seem to have more medical spending, but there's a lot more spread over here at the higher levels that is, even if you are making lots of money, you may not always spend a lot of money on your medical expenses because maybe you just don't get sick at that specific time.

So what this means is that the residuals or these error terms over here at this left hand side of the plot are systematically smaller than the residuals over at the right hand side of the plot.

So the variance of the residuals or the spread of them is not the same.

And there's two main plots that we can use to diagnose this issue. Well, first of all, you may be able to see [00:18:00] it a little bit inside of the regular scatter plot, but when you look at these residual plots over here on the right, then it may be much clearer.

So for the standard residual plot, you can see here it's very clear.

Therefore the smaller X values, we have smaller residuals. And over here at the larger X value you have, you have larger residuals.

but this other plot here is what is specialized to tell you about homogeneity of variants. And what this blood is quite similar to this one, but with a few small changes. the first small change is that any negative value on this irregular residuals plot is switched to positive.

So here we take the absolute value of the residuals. 

to make that clear, what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna click on one of these points, and when you click on the point, it's going to show you what point that is equivalent to on the diagnostic plots. And notice that here the residual is of course, negative, and because of that, on the residual plot, it comes below this dot, dot, dot line.

But watch what happens if we drag it downwards. If we drag it downwards, it seems to become more negative over here, but it's going up [00:19:00] more positive there because this is kind of the absolute value of this particular chart.

So what is the effect of this then? The effect of this is that this fitted line on this, absolute value of the standardized residual plots, this fitted line, 

if it's going up, that means the size of the residuals is overall going up as we go from the left to the right hand side of the plot. So, lemme say that sentence again. Here you can see that the residuals are getting bigger as we go from the left to the right hand side of the plot.

and this y axis is the absolute value of those residuals. So if the fitted line here is going up. Then that means the residuals are basically getting bigger from the left to the right side of the plot.

So here it's very easy to see that we don't have homogeneity of variants, we don't have homogeneity, we don't have equal variance. What we rather have is what's called hetero spasticity or qual variants or heterogeneity. Because the residuals are going up, from left to right. You may also have a situation where the residuals are going down from left to right.

That would also [00:20:00] be a violation. And you can see some other names for this plot here. Sometimes it's called scale, location, plot, or you could also call it directly by what is actually plotting. 

now, I mentioned there's several changes between this Y axis here and this Y axis. For now, I've only explained the absolute value one. the other two changes, as you'll notice, is that here we standardize the residuals in the homogeneity variance plot, and we also take the square root.

Now, the explanation for why we do each of these is a little bit complex, so I won't actually get into it. but I just want you to notice that this Y axis and this Y axis are related.

That is, they come from the same data. It's just that this one is a transformed version of this.

So we've mostly been looking at the clear violation example, of homogeneity of variance. So this is an example where we have heterogeneity of variance or hetero spasticity. Let's look at the good fit. So here's the good fit. 

you can see in this scale, location, plot that the reference line is indeed roughly flat and, roughly horizontal. Of course, it's not exactly flat, but you can imagine drawing a completely flat [00:21:00] line through this confidence interval cloud. And if a flat line can fit in there, then it's probably good.

Okay, now let's look at the effect on our results of, this, heteroscedasticity. So the first thing to note is that in the case of heteroscedasticity, your slope is typically still good. So it's typically still left unbiased. But the problem is that your standard errors and confidence intervals are not going to be accurate anymore.

and let's think about the reason for this. Let's go back to the clear violation example. So when you fit a model and you calculate a standard error, which then gives you a confidence interval, What you're saying is that there's some band, around your fitted line, and this is your confidence interval within which you're pretty sure, your predicted value, lies.

BUT IN this top half of the plot, confidence intervals really should be significantly wider than in the bottom half. But the linear model doesn't have a direct way of accommodating that.

And so your confidence intervals and standard errors are a little bit untrustworthy.

Now in terms of the formal test for this, you can do what's called the brush pagan test.

And then in order to [00:22:00] fix it, there's something called a heterogeneity, robust standard errors, which is actually not too hard to do in R. We've given you links there that you can click on. and there's some other options as well to fix, but this is the easiest one.

Okay, so now let's do a few practice questions. 

When residual variance is clearly non-constant, that means we have heteroscedasticity. Why are the usual confidence intervals on reliable pause and think.

So here the answer is going to be a, the standard formula assumes constant variance. So the resulting interval will either be too narrow in certain points or too wide in certain points. So this is what I was explaining up here. It'll be maybe a little bit too narrow over here at the top half, and too wide, maybe over here at the bottom half.

GRAPH Courses Team-2: And here's our final example. Why might income and medical spending look like a fan shaped scatter as we see here?

Pause and think.

the answer is again, [00:23:00] A. So higher income households have more discretionary spending, so individual choices add more variability at the top. 

GRAPH Courses Team-2: Okay, so now we have only three more. Let's look at influential points. I for influential points. So this is again, a fairly simple one. It's basically asking is there any single point or a few points that are really pulling the regression line too much? Are there points that are overly influential? And we'll start with the clear violation example.

So here we're looking at the relationship between BMI and total cholesterol. And if you just look at these cloud of points over here, there seems to be a line that would fit in that direction. But then because we have this outlier over here, it has a very strong leverage, a very strong pull on this line, and then look at where the line actually got fit.

It's completely off from the rest of the trend.

And so watch, if I double click on this point, double click on it. That'll get rid of it. And now here's our beautiful fitted line. So you can see that it's having a huge leverage, a huge influence on that plot. Let's click back on clear violation.

And the specific plot that we use to [00:24:00] diagnose this is this one here. It's called the residuals versus leverage plot, or just the leverage plot. 

by now you understand what this Y axis is. It's just the residuals that is the distance between the point and the line. But what is this X axis? The leverage. The leverage is basically the distance from the point to the mean of the Xs. So as you can see, this point is very far away from the mean of the remaining, mass of points.

and that makes it have a high leverage. So it's far to the right of this plot. So watch what happens if we bring it closer? As you can see, it is, its leverage is shrinking, so now its leverage is 0.4. We bring it even closer. Now the leverage is 0.2 and so on.

and now what you'll notice on this leverage plot is that in addition to leverage and standardized residuals, what we also have is this dotted line here, which gives us what's called a Cooks D. A Cooks D is an indicator that combines both leverage and standardized residuals to give you a measure of influence.

So if a point is outside of this cook's d. Equal to 0.5 cone. That [00:25:00] means it has usually quite a large residual or a large absolute residual and also a large leverage. So big leverage, it's gonna be outside of the cone. And also a large residual that's a large positive residual or a large negative residual will also tend to push it outside of the cone.

So let's take this plot, which has both a high leverage and a quite a large negative residual. If we push it up, you'll see that it's residual will start to move further up in the plot as well. And now we have brought it into the actual cone and it is no longer flagged as an influential point.

So if this was our data, this would be a fine model, at least based on this specific diagnostic. But when you pull it down, then it becomes flagged.

So now we understand what this informality means, Let's think about the effect on your results. So if you have a highly influential point, then it's going to make your slope no longer reliable, Because the slope will shift substantially when that point is removed.

And then if your slope is not reliable, then your standard errors, your confidence interval and so on, are also quite unstable because they depend a lot on [00:26:00] that single point. And in terms of the formal test for this, I already showed you the cook's distance, which has the nice feature that you can actually just look at. It's basically on the leverage plot, so anything above this cook's D of 0.5, you may wanna flag as a highly influential point. And then there's a number of additional formal tests as well.

Now, how do you fix this? When you notice this, the first thing is you need to investigate the flag points to understand why they're unusual. Why? Because sometimes they're actually data errors, so if it's a data error, you need to correct it or remove it and then refit the line.

But if the data looks to be real, then you need to report these results. So usually what you do is you report the results without, and with that data or with and without that data, which is a kind of sensitivity analysis, seeing how sensitive are your results to that specific point, or if there's several outliers to that group of points.

All right, so that's about influe or influential points. Let's look at some practice questions.

Okay. Here we have four practice questions. I'll only go through two, and then later you can go through the rest yourself. The first one asks three [00:27:00] panels show different points marked in red. Which point is most influential on the fitted line? Pause and think. 

Here the answer is going to be this right panel because it's both high leverage and it also has a high residual. This one may be high leverage because it's far from the main Xs, but it doesn't have a large residual, so the answer here is gonna be C. Here's another question. Which pair of ingredients does cook's distance combine to flag a point as influential?

Pause and think.

All right, so hopefully you remember that the answer here is B, leverage. That's unusual, X and residual size.

GRAPH Courses Team-2: Okay, so now we have just two more left. We're now on N for normality of residuals, which is the last of these that is checkable with the check model function.

This one asks, do prediction errors follow a bell curve? Are the residuals or the prediction errors, normally distributed?

And to diagnose this one, the plot we look at usually is what's [00:28:00] called a normal QQ plot. QQ stands for Quantile Quantile plot, and it's actually one of the harder plots to understand outta these four. So to explain it, I have a separate box down here that we'll go through, But I will give a relatively short explanation.

So we've linked, two videos that I think also do a good job. Each of them is about 15 minutes long, so it may take you a while to get through it, but it may be worth it to understand how a QQ plot works, 

So to explain this, we're going to start with the scatter plot where we have a predictor and the outcome you can imagine this is height and weight or something else. And the first step is to go from the regular scatter plot to the residual plot. Remember that is just kind of like a rotation of this line, so that on the Y axis, what you're actually plotting is the length of these residuals.

then the next thing you're going to do is you take each of these residuals and plot them on a kind of standardized axis. So for example, this residual here of negative five will go maybe in this bucket.

A residual of positive five will probably go in that bucket. A residual around zero will [00:29:00] go in this bucket.

And so what you can think of is imagine that these, these dots just all kind of fell down onto the Y axis. You would get a mound that looks something like this, right? Most of the points are in the middle. That is, most of the residuals are a little bit small, and then there's some that are big. But overall, it's just to form a kind of normal shape in terms of the density of these residuals, at least looking from this y axis.

So that's what this histogram is here,

and if you want, you can actually plot a histogram of the residuals, directly in r you can probably easily Google that code.

Then the next thing you're going to do is you're going to overlay on top of this histogram an exactly normal curve. So imagine overlaying on top of this an exactly normal curve.

And so this QQ plot will then be looking at the exactly normal curve points, so the theoretical normal against your actual residual, values.

and so what that means is that if you have a bunch of outliers, so let's imagine that we had a lot of points stacked over here on the right hand side, Then you'll end [00:30:00] up with lots of dots that are not on trend. You end up with lots of dots that are kind of above this fixed line.

So this fixed line here is trying to match the exact normal distribution. 

I know that was still not a perfect explanation, but I'll stop there on the normal QQ plot and I'll refer you to these two videos if you want to understand it more. But then now let's get to the final plot, which is what we actually see, on our diagnostics is this det trended QQ plot.

And this one is basically just a transformation of the normal QQ plot where you take this line and you rotate it to be exactly flat. and then what you plot on the Y axis is the deviations from the line. So that allows you to better see. For example, here at the top, you can see that the dots are quite deviated from the line, but it's hard to see on this diagonal plot. But here it's much easier to see that deviation from the line.

So that's my best attempt at explaining this de trended QQ plot. But, like I mentioned, one of the reasons that I like the performance check model function is that it just tells you exactly what you need to look for. So even if you don't fully understand the theory behind how the plot is created, [00:31:00] you can still kind of use it as a diagnostic.

So this is an example of when the, the normality of the residuals is actually being obeyed. 

and I know it may not look like the dots are exactly on the line, but again, that's why we have this confidence interval. As long as they're roughly within this confidence interval, then you're probably good on normality. Let's look at an example where we get a clear violation of normality.

so here you can imagine that if you try to kind of do a histogram of these points, of these residuals, we have a bunch of residuals that are mostly small, and then all of a sudden we have these huge residuals. So if you plotted the residuals on a histogram, it would not be normal at all. You'd probably get a very skewed distribution.

And that shows up when we look at this normal QQ plot. As you can see, the points are not really trying to follow this line at all. They're kind of all over the place, and there's several that fall outside of our confidence interval.

so this would be flagged as a violation of the normality of residuals, assumption.

Now what exactly is this example data set here? Here we're looking at neighborhood [00:32:00] poverty rate and ER visits per thousand. So we're saying that overall there seems to be a general trend where the higher the poverty, the higher the ER visits.

but there's some neighborhoods that have, for some reason extremely high ER visits,

And these are causing a bunch of outliers that break the normality assumption. Now, if there were just one or two of these points, they would probably be flagged as highly influential points. But as you can see, none of them is actually breaking the threshold for Influe, because there's quite a few of them.





GRAPH Courses Team-7: Now let's think about what goes wrong when your model does not meet this normality of residuals assumption

As it says here, in terms of the effects on your results, your slope is still more or less unbiased. However, a problem comes in interpreting the SEs, CIs, and P values. Specifically, even if your SE may still be reasonable, the conversion from SE to a confidence interval or to P value kind of depends on or assumes normality of residuals

And so your confidence intervals and [00:33:00] p-values may no longer be trustworthy, and this is especially the case in small samples. So if you have a large sample, let's say a sample size above maybe hundred, then this normality of residuals assumption is not actually that important because the central limits theorem will rescue you.

And so even if your residuals are not normal, as long as you have a pretty big sample size, you don't have to worry too much. So as it says here, overall, with large samples, small departures from normality are often less of a problem. Now, how do you test for a departure from normality formally? There is a test called the Shapiro-Wilk test, and that test is run by the check_normality function in the performance package.

So this is a convenience wrapper that runs the test under the hood. If you want to fix this problem, you can try transforming the outcome. That may reduce the influence of some of these outliers. Or you can also check those extreme values that are affecting the distribution.

Maybe they're mistakes. So if we go back to this deviation example, maybe some of [00:34:00] these, which are making our residuals non-normal, maybe some of those are actually mistakes

Let's do two easy practice questions. First one, in this detrended q-q plot, the points trail away from zero line at both ends while the middle stays close to it. What is this most likely a sign of? Is it heavier tails than a normal distribution or approximately normal residuals? Pause and think

So hopefully you know the answer here is heavier tails than a normal distribution. If the residuals were approximately normal, then our points will mostly fit in the confidence interval. That's what we explained about how to read this plot. so when you deviate from the normality of assumption, your dots will not really follow this line, and they'll generally fall out of this confidence interval

GRAPH Courses Team-7: Next question. In this detrended q-q plot, the points scatter randomly around the horizontal zero line, mostly within the shaded confidence band. What does that suggest about the residuals? Is it that they're roughly normal, heavy-tailed, or skewed? Pause and think

[00:35:00] So hopefully you know the answer, of course, is roughly normal. There's a couple more questions for you, but I'll let you try those out yourself

GRAPH Courses Team-7: Now let's go back to the first N in our examples, which stands for no multicollinearity. And this answers the question, are the predictors too correlated? It applies only to multiple, uh, linear regression, because with simple regression, you only have one predictor, so you can't have multiple predictors that are too correlated What do we mean by too correlated?

That means they're basically carrying the same information

And it will therefore be hard for your model to tease apart the two effects since the two variables are very similar

To better understand this, let's look at an example that has high overlap. So this is an example that does not respect this assumption. This is an example that does have multicollinearity. Here, we're trying to predict a child's height based on two variables: their age and their school grade. Okay? But of course, age and school grade contain very similar [00:36:00] information for young children

And so if, for example, you plotted school grade versus age, you see it's basically a straight line. So these are very correlated with each other, and that makes it hard to tease apart which one has an actual effect on the ch- child's height Now you'll notice that all the other four plots look fine, but let's look at this fifth plot that you get when you run the, uh, performance check model function on a, uh, on a multiple linear regression.

You get this fifth plot of a multicollinearity And what is showing on the, uh, Y-axis is the variance inflation factor, VIF

Which is basically an indicator of the correlation between the existing variables. It basically says using all the other predictors in the model, in this case only grade, how well can we predict age? And then using all the other predictors in the model, how well can we predict grade?

And if you can predict them well, it means they're super well correlated with each other, and you'll get a high VIF. a VIF above ten is generally considered bad, and you may want to do some work to fix that. [00:37:00] We'll talk a little bit about that below. 

In order to see this more clearly, let's copy this R code that will let us fit this model in R and then check the model diagnostics

So here's the model we're fitting, LM predicting height CM with age years and grade And then we run the check model function

And here is what that output looks like. You can see that in addition to the linearity, homogeneity, influential observations, and normality plots, we now have this collinearity plots. And it says high collinearity may inflate parameter uncertainty. And you can see age years and grade both have indeed high collinearity because they're above ten in this red section.

So anything above ten in that red section is generally considered high collinearity, 

So that's an example of high overlap. Here's an example of low overlap. Here we're predicting a child's height based on their age and their parents' income. we wouldn't expect these two to be too correlated because, income is not really gonna affect age So there isn't too much of a correlation here. And when we do our check model function, [00:38:00] you see that these both have low VIF, and therefore they're not worrying from a no multicollinearity standpoint. Now let's look at the explanation box for multicollinearity. We've already explained what it means and how to read the output.

a VI, a VIF near one means there's little overlap. Uh, when you get to about five, you're starting to have strong overlap, And definitely above 10, you have very strong overlap, and that is nicely indicated by these colors on the check_model function

Now let's think about what are the effects on your results. Now, your slopes may not be biased just because your predictors overlap, but the individual slopes can become unstable and hard to interpret. Because your two predictors or your three predictors are very similar to each other, the model really struggles to isolate the effect of each one from the other.

It's hard to tease apart these effects. And because it's hard to tease apart these effects, because their effects are unstable under the, uh, lin-linear regression, uh, algorithm, then your standard errors are going to become quite large, and similarly, your confident intervals as well will be quite wide

So it's-- it becomes hard to tease [00:39:00] out the effects. The effects become unstable to pin down, and therefore your standard error becomes larger. So like it says here, overall the model can still predict well, but it may not estimate each predictor's separate effect very well. The formal test of this is the variance inflation factor, which is the exact metric that we get in the output plot from check_model.

So we don't need to do any other fancy, checks you could also look at the correlation matrix to look at the correlations between all the different, uh, predictors, and we have some links as to how to do that for you there.

And the check_collinearity function from the performance package is a convenience wrapper that computes the VIF for each predictor, so you can also use that. Now, in terms of how to fix, the main fix is you could try to remove some of those overlapping predictors, or you could also try to combine them into a single score If prediction is your main goal and you don't care too much about interpreting the individual coefficients, then you can just keep both predictors

Okay, now let's look at two practice questions. First one, a researcher fits this model predicting blood pressure on age. Why can collinearity not [00:40:00] occur in this model? Pause and think. Of course, because there's only one predictor. multicollinearity applies to multiple linear regression

Here's another one. A model is fit as follows with health score being predicted by education and income. Education and income t-turn out to be very correlated with each other. What does this imply for the coefficient estimates?

Is it that the two predictors carry overlapping information, making it hard to estimate their separate effects? Or the predictors will jointly produce non-normal residuals

So hopefully you know that the answer here is A. That's what we just explained

GRAPH Courses Team-8: And now we get to our final assumption, which is E for exogeneity. This specific assumption asks whether the predictor is independent of the error term. We will explain what that means in a second. But what I want to flag for you very importantly is that

if this [00:41:00] exogeneity fails, you can still use the model for description and prediction Just that you can no longer treat it as a causal effect. So exogeneity is an assumption for causal inference. If exogeneity fails, you can still use your linear regression normally for describing associations and for making predictions. You just can't ascribe causation. So it's a special assumption in that Now let's see if we can try to understand what we mean by exogeneity. Exogeneity simply means that the predictor should not be related to any unmeasured factors that also affects the outcome. These unmeasured factors that also affect the outcome are what we call the error term. So your predictor should not be related to this error term, which refers to the unmeasured factors that affect the outcome.

There are three main ways that you can fail this assumption. That is, the three main ways your predictor could end up being somewhat related to these unmeasured factors affecting the outcome. The first one is confounding, the second is reverse causation, and the last one is [00:42:00] measurement error. We'll talk mostly about confounding as an example in this case.

here's a quick example of confounding, which actually comes from real, uh, public health literature. Early in the study of lung cancer, people started to think that maybe coffee intake was causing lung cancer incidence

So in this sort of fake data set that I've shown here, if you look at coffee consumption and lung cancer rate

You'll notice that you can fit a line that seems to rise with both variables. But if you then reveal the smoking status, you will notice that people that drink less coffee tend to smoke a little bit less than those that drink a lot of coffee.

This is actually true to real-world habits in the place where this study was done. And so smoking is this confounder that's making it look like there's an effect of coffee on lung cancer

So that's the explanation of confounding, and this is an example where we are not ob-obeying the exogeneity assumption, where we're breaking the exogeneity assumption. 

Now, this term exogenous is a bit of a confusing term, and I wanna take some time to explain where it [00:43:00] comes from The prefix exo means outside, and the prefix genus means born. So exogenous means born outside something, or in this case, born outside the system.

And the thing that should be born outside the system is the effect that X has on our outcome So here's an example that fulfills exogeneity. you have some term X that is having some effect on your outcome Y. You will also have an error term. There's always going to be an error term, some unmeasured causes that may also have an effect on Y but your predictor coffee here is coming from outside of this system However, when there's confounding, as in this example where smoking is confounding the relationship, you can see that now we are sneaking in something that is inside, that's endogenous to this error term, that is sneaking out, having an effect on coffee, and then that effect is then going back and, uh, affecting our outcome.

So here the effect is coming from purely outside the system. Here it's coming [00:44:00] partly from within the system. We want this effect to come from purely outside the system. That is why we want X to be unrelated to epsilon or the error. And going back to the definition we gave of exogeneity, that is why we want our predictor X to be independent of this error term.

So that is my best attempt at explaining exogeneity. Now let's look at the effects on your results. As we said, your regression is still valid as a description of the association in the data, but it may not represent a causal effect any longer

And this applies as well to the SE, CIs, and P values. These apply to the fitted association. They do not describe a causal effect. In terms of formal tests, there's no real formal test or plots that you can do to test for exogeneity. For this, you have to use your subject matter knowledge to think about whether there's a confounder or there's possible reverse causation in the data.

And the main way to fix this is a randomized control experiment But of course, you can't always run an experiment, so with observational data, you can add control variables to [00:45:00] control for certain confounders and when you're trying to decide on what control variables to use, You often want to draw a D-A-G, a DAG, which is a directed acyclic graph I think we've talked about this before, and we'll probably talk about it again in the future

Now let's look at two practice questions. The first one says, a study reports that more physical therapy predicts higher pain scores. This diagram suggests one reason this slope cannot be read as therapy causes more pain. What is the issue? Pause and think As you can see, we have a common cause, a common confounder

That is affecting both therapy visits and pain score And so if you were to fit a model that ignored injury severity here, you would be violating the exogeneity assumption Here's another one. What is the best way to assess whether exogeneity is plausible? Is it domain knowledge or standard residual diagnostic plots? Pause and think. [00:46:00] So the answer is gonna be domain knowledge. You don't have any residuals to certify exogeneity. You need to apply your own design knowledge to the question

Okay, so congratulations on getting through this very long lesson. Let's quickly go over what we have said

We have listed about eight things that you want to check when you're thinking about the quality and the assumptions and the diagnostics of your linear regression models. We started with making sure you have a big enough sample size where we said you should aim for at least ten observations per parameter, Then we said that your residual should all be independent of each other, and we looked at a couple of ways that this could be violated with cluster data and also with time-correlated data

Then we looked at five assumptions that can be checked with the performance check model function in R

We started by thinking about the shape

or the linearity

And here we say that the relationship between your predictor and outcome should actually be describable by a straight line, as we see in this example, [00:47:00] and as we don't see in this example

Then we looked at homogeneity of variance, also called homoscedasticity or equal variance. And this means that the spread of residuals should stay constant as we go through the fitted values. Here's an example that obeys homogeneity of variance. Here's an example that doesn't obey homogeneity of variance. As you can see, as we go along these fitted values, the residuals start getting bigger and bigger, and this is very clearly seen in this homogeneity of variance plot Then we said you should also check for influential points

Because if a single point is pulling the regression line too much, that may affect the applicability of your regression model. Here's an example where we don't have an influential point. Here's one where we have a very influential point that is giving us a totally different line from what we would fit if we did not have that point.

and we looked at this influential observations plot to identify that Then we looked at normality of residuals as well Here the assumption is that the prediction error should roughly follow a normal bell curve. in this example on the screen, that is respected.

And [00:48:00] here's an example that's violated. Here we have these really long residuals, but then the majority of them are super short. So if you drew these on a histogram, you have a very long tail.

Otherwise said, your residuals would not be normal. And we looked at how to assess that using a Q-Q plot. Importantly, we said that for large sample sizes, the normality of residuals assumption is not super important

Then I talked about no multicollinearity, which applies only to multiple linear regression, and this basically asks whether your predictors are too correlated with each other, and we saw how to assess this using the variance inflation factor.

Here's an example where the variance inflation factors are low, And here is an example where the variance inflation factors are high. And then lastly, we talked about exogeneity, which is the assumption that the predictor is independent of the error term.

You don't necessarily need this to fit a valid model, but you need it to interpret the slopes as causal. And one way that you can violate exogeneity is through confounding, where a third variable is affecting both your predictor and your outcome.

So congrats again on getting introduced [00:49:00] to the art and science of linear regression diagnostics

This is a tricky topic, but it's one that not a lot of people understand very clearly. But now you are in the lucky group that has a strong foundation in these principles

Thank you for sticking with me through the lesson. I'll see you in the next video. Bye-bye. 



